# VERSION 1.0.0

* You can override the default printing method by providing a `proto_print`
  method in your object.

* `graph.proto()` has been removed since it relies on packages that are 
  no longer on CRAN. `name.proto()` is no longer exported since it was
  used primarily by `graph.proto()`.

* Hadley Wickham has taken over maintenance.

* All outstanding R CMD check problems have been fixed.

* New NAMESPACE file that ensures that proto works when not attached.

# VERSION 0.3-9

* minor changes to satisfy subtitute/eval changes in R 2.13.0 (thanks to
  Luke Tierney)

* x could previously not be the name of a proto object. Now fixed.

* proto print methods could break str.proto.  Now fixed.

# VERSION 0.3-8

* minor changes to satisfy R 2.6.0

# VERSION 0.3-7

* FAQ added as Appendix A of vignette

* str.proto added (modified code of Tom Short)

* the class of p$fun is now "instantiatedProtoMethod" and
  print.instantiatedProtoMethod provided (modified code of Tom Short)

* "$.proto" now has a third argument which, if present, is a list of
  arguments at which to evaluate the instantiated method.  Intended for
  use within sapply/lapply/etc.  See examples in ?proto .

* modified DESCRIPTION to point to new home page

# VERSION 0.3-6

* order of arguments in proto and as.proto.list changed to
  address a bug

# VERSION 0.3-5

* new arg funEnvir= on proto and as.proto.list [experimental]

* new arg SELECT= on as.proto [experimental]

# VERSION 0.3-4

* new function graph.proto using Rgraphviz replaces dot.proto

* updated vignettes

* added proto-package.Rd (viewable via package?proto)

# VERSION 0.3-3

* updated NEWS, README, WISHLIST and moved to to inst directory

# VERSION 0.3-2

* bug fix (recursion bug)

* documentation improvements (vignette, .Rd files, README)

# VERSION 0.3-1

* .Rd file improvements

# VERSION 0.3-0

* that/super changed to .that/.super.

* .Name changed to ..Name in dot.proto

* improvements to .Rd files and vignette

# VERSION 0.2-6

* demo index file fixed and demo renamed and enhanced

* proto.bib updated

* consistent use of obj$with(meth) in examples and demo where method
  not used in the context of a call

# VERSION 0.2-5

* vignette and reference card now pass R CMD check/build/install

* CHANGES renamed to NEWS

# VERSION 0.2-4

* added control argument to dot.proto

# VERSION 0.2-3

* added reference card

* modified demo, .Rd files and vignette to correspond to new interface

* changed argument list for proto and eliminated delegate

* created as.proto.list and eliminated copy.proto

* fixed bug in proto.  Parent was not always set correctly.

* added ... argument to copy.proto

* added the isnot.function support function for use with copy.proto

* cleaned up $.proto code for handling .. names.

* the on-the-fly wrapper function generated by obj$meth now has the
  current environment as its environment.

* proto no longer coerces its parent to a proto object.  See note
  at end of proto.Rd.

* added .. name processing and updated .Rd file

* dot.proto now accepts names with dots in them

* added delegate and copy.proto commands and updated .Rd file

# VERSION 0.2-2

* added .. name processing and updated .Rd file

* dot.proto now accepts names with dots in them

* added delegate and copy.proto commands and updated .Rd file

